So now that we've talked
about the fork-join pool,
we've talked a bit about
the common fork-join pool,
and I described just a bit
about how the parallel streams
framework can be used
in order to-- or rather,
how the parallel
streams framework uses
the common fork-join pool in
order to schedule and execute
tasks to perform its work.
Let's now go ahead and
talk about how to configure
the common fork-join pool.
And as you'll see, there's
a couple of different ways
to do it.
Before we talk
about that, though,
let's talk about what
you get out of the box.
So by default, the
common fork-join pool
has one less thread than
the total number of cores.
So if, let's say,
for sake of argument,
we have a quad-core processor
that's not hyperthreaded--
just to make it simple--
then the size of the
common fork-join pool
will be 3 because it's
number of cores minus 1.
So we'd have three cores
for a quad-core processor.
You might go, well,
that's kind of strange.
Why do we only have three?
I'll explain why in a second.
The reason why
this is the case is
because the calling thread, for
example, for parallel streams--
the thread that sets the stream
in motion, the thread that
calls its terminal operation--
is actually borrowed
and used along
with the other worker threads
in the common fork-join pool.
So you'll actually end up
with using as many threads
to process the behavior as
there are cores on the machine.
It's just that the calling
thread is also temporarily
included as part of that pool.
And that could be
the main thread.
It could be whatever thread
ends up running the terminal
operation on a parallel stream.
However, there are
situations where
this default number of fork-join
pool threads may be inadequate.
May not want to just limit
ourselves to, say, four threads
overall.
Why could that be the case?
Well, consider a parallel image
downloading and processing app.
For example, we'll talk
later about the image stream
gang, which is a case study
we mentioned earlier which
downloads images from remote
web servers and processes them
and stores them in parallel.
Well, in such a case,
we might actually
end up having lots of
images we want to download.
We may have way more
images to download than we
have cores on a machine.
Why does that matter?
Well, for image downloading
and then storing--
anything that involves I/O--
there will be
periods of time when
worker threads are blocked
waiting for the I/O operations
to complete.
And if we're not
careful, we'll have
a problem when we try to
download more images at a given
point than there are
numbers of cores.
And these problems
could either range
from not utilizing all
the effective parallelism
in the process and the processor
to deadlock in some cases.
And the reason why
this is an issue
is if a threat is
blocked on I/O,
it will go to sleep
until that I/O is done.
If there are only as many
threads as there are cores,
but there's lots more
images to be downloaded,
we'll end up underutilizing
the processor cores.
Because while those
threads are blocked,
we could have other threads
downloading other images that
would continue to run.
And so, as a result, we will
underutilize the processing
capabilities.
And I've actually got a demo
I'll show you here shortly that
illustrates this performance
degradation that occurs when
you have too few threads
relative to the number of cores
that you've got and the number
of images that download.
So there's a couple
of ways to control
the common fork-join
pool programmatically.
One of the ways of doing this
is by setting a property.
You can set this
property that's called
java.util.concurrent
ForkJoinPool.common
parallelism, which is
a bit of a mouthful,
and such a mouthful I
actually broke the string up
into little chunks
in order to do this.
Setting this property,
however, affects all parallel
streams in a process.
And it's often
somewhat difficult
to estimate how many
threads we need.
What should the right number be?
And whatever number
we pick might
be wrong for some use case.
Another thing that's a little
bit complicated about this
is that this
property can only be
changed before the common
fork-join pool is initialized.
The moment the common
fork-join pool is initialized,
you can no longer
set this property.
It has no effect.
So basically, what happens
is that the common fork-join
join pool, which is basically
a static resource-- it's kind
of a singleton, if you will.
It's initialized on demand
the first time it's used,
and you'd better well set that
property before that point.
Otherwise, it'll
just be ignored.
Another way to do things,
which is more flexible and not
as limited, is to use something
called the ManagedBlocker
interface.
And this can be a way to
tell the fork-join framework
to dynamically
add worker threads
to the common fork-join
pool temporarily when
blocking operations occur.
And we're going to end up
talking in great detail
about this when we talk
about the fork-join pool
and the common fork-join pool
in later weeks of the course.
So I won't try to go into
much detail here now.
Just letting you know it's
available as a resource
that a parallel
stream can also use.
This ability to temporarily add
new worker threads dynamically
to the common fork-join
join pool is perfectly
suited for behaviors
that block out I/O,
like our image download
and processing and storage
app we discussed.
And it's also useful if you
have to block unsynchronizers,
or blocking queues,
or things like that.
So anytime you
have to block, then
you probably want to be using
the ManagedBlocker interface.
And as we'll see
later on, as we talk
about this in more detail
later in the course,
this interface can only be used
with a common fork-join pool.
Other fork-join pool that you
make in a more specialized way
cannot dynamically increase the
way that the common fork-join
pool can because they don't
support the ManagedBlocker
interface.